# Greenhouse Gases

<div class="admonition highlight">
    <strong>Highlights</strong>
    <ul>
    <li>Over the last 65 years, the concentration of carbon dioxide (CO₂) in the atmosphere measured at NOAA’s Mauna Loa Observatory has increased by more than 100 ppm, reaching over 424 ppm in 2024.</li>
    <li>The annual average rate of increase in CO₂ since the 1960s is more than +1.6 ppm/year, increasing to over +2.3 ppm/year in the last decade.</li>
    </ul>
</div>


## Background
Carbon dioxide (CO₂) and other gases (e.g., methane-CH4, nitrous oxide-N2O, halogenated compounds-mainly fluorinated gases) in the atmosphere trap some of the heat from the Sun that radiates from Earth’s surface.  This process, known as the “greenhouse effect,” makes Earth habitable.  Human activities since the late 1800s have raised the concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, strengthening the greenhouse effect, warming the climate, and driving changes that cascade throughout the environment (IPCC 2021, 2023).

CO₂ contributes the largest share of long‑term warming due to its large emissions and long atmospheric lifetime (IPCC, 2021).  This makes the concentration of CO₂ in the atmosphere, measured in parts per million (ppm), a benchmark indicator of environmental conditions.  The longest, most widely cited direct CO₂ record is from measurements taken at NOAA’s Mauna Loa Observatory.

Occurring along with these long-term global scale human-induced changes in climate are natural patterns of variability that affect weather at regional and local scales over the short term.  The El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO), with its El Niño and La Niña phases, is a prominent pattern of natural climate variability in the Pacific.  The presence of such significant year-to-year and decade-to-decade variability can make it difficult to discern long-term changes in climate due to increasing greenhouse gases. 


## Atmospheric Concentration of Carbon Dioxide (CO2)
NOAA’s Mauna Loa Observatory in Hawaiʻi has measured the annual mean concentration of CO2 at Mauna Loa since 1958, when it recorded an average monthly observation of 315.71 ppm (Figure 1).  Measurements first passed 350 ppm in 1988 and 400 ppm in 2015.  Measurements first exceeded 425ppm in March of 2024.

The annual mean concentration of CO2 at Mauna Loa in 2025 was 427.35ppm. That corresponds to an increase of more than 100 ppm over the last 65 years, a rate of more than +1.6 ppm per year.  Over the last decade, the annual mean rate of growth of CO2 was even higher (more than +2.3 ppm per year). In 2024 the growth rate was 3.3 ppm (±0.11).


<figure style="text-align: center; margin: 2em 0;">
  <iframe src="../../_static/figures/F1_CO2_trend.html"
          style="width: 140%; height: 500px; border: none; border-radius: 6px;">
  </iframe>
  <figcaption style="font-size: 0.9em; color: #444; margin-top: 0.5em;">
    <strong>Figure 1.</strong> Monthly Mean Concentration of Atmospheric CO2 at Mauna Loa since 1958. The blue line represents the monthly mean values, centered in the middle of each month. The red line represents the same, after correction for the average seasonal cycle.  The solid black line represents the trend, which is statistically significant (p < 0.05).  From NOAA ESRL Global Monitoring Division. https://www.esrl.noaa.gov/gmd/ccgg/trends/
  </figcaption>
</figure>